---
title: "JACK2 v1.9.13 release"
date: 2019-10-06
author: falkTX
categories: news
---
A new version of JACK2 has just been released.<br/>
You can grab the latest release source code at
<https://github.com/jackaudio/jack2/releases>.

The official changelog is:

- Meta-data API implementation. (and a few tools updated with support for it)
- Correct GPL licence to LGPL for files needed to build libjack.
- Remove FreeBoB backend (superseded by FFADO).
- define JACK_LIB_EXPORT, useful for internal clients.
- Mark jack_midi_reset_buffer as deprecated.
- Add example systemd unit file
- Signal to systemd when jackd is ready.
- Set "seq" alsa midi driver to maximum resolution possible.
- Fix loading internal clients from another internal client.
- Code cleanup and various fixes. (too many to mention here, see git log for details)

This release is focused on meta-data support, and this is why it took so long.<br/>
There might be odd cases here and there and a few bugs, as it is often the case
for all software...<br/>
So please make sure to report back any issues!

Special thanks goes to Rui Nuno Capela for the initial pull-request regarding
meta-data.<br/>
There was some work needed afterwards, but that was the biggest hurdle and
motivation needed for a new release. :)

There are still no updated macOS or Windows builds, those will be handled at
a later date.<br/>
Current plan is to have JACK1 feature-parity first
(only a2jmidid and zita internal clients missing now),<br/>
and afterwards merging examples/tools and header files to be shared between
JACK1 and JACK2.

The situation regarding development of JACK and JACK1 considered legacy has not
changed since last release 2 years ago.<br/>
See [JACK2 v1.9.12 release and future plans] post for more information.

PS: I will be in Cologne for [Sonoj], giving a talk about
"Past, Present and Future of JACK".<br/>
There is no registration fee, so please feel free to come by and say hello! :)

[Sonoj]: https://www.sonoj.org/
[JACK2 v1.9.12 release and future plans]: /news/2017/12/21/jack2-v1-9-12-release-and-future-plans
