---
title: "JACK2 v1.9.18 release"
author: "falkTX"
date: "2021-04-15T13:36:24+0100"
---
A new version of JACK2 has just been released.<br/>
You can grab the latest release source code at
<https://github.com/jackaudio/jack2/releases> and macOS/Windows installers at
<https://github.com/jackaudio/jack2-releases/releases>.

This release focuses on 2 main things: adding zalsa internal client and fixing macOS builds in regards to DB/meta-data.<br/>
A few other fixes were made as contributed by developers.

With zalsa now part of JACK2, we are one more step closer to JACK1 feature parity.<br/>
Worth noting that this is purely the client, we still need to add the switches to be able to load internal clients directly from `jackd` startup command-line.<br/>
Will be interesting to attempt to make this zalsa client also behave as a "slave adapter" like done with ALSA `audioadapter`, `coremidi` and `winmme` drivers.<br/>
Something for a future release.

On macOS, please restart the JACK server after updating to 1.9.18.

The official changelog is:
* Add zalsa_in/out as internal client (based on zita-a2j/j2a and jack1 code)
* Fix jack_midi_dump deadlock on close after the jack server is restarted
* Fix interrupt signal for linux futex waits
* Fix usage of meta-data in official macOS builds (private DB errors)
* Log error message when cleaning previous DB (macOS and Windows)


Now for those unaware of this whole "zalsa" thing...<br/>
This is basically zita-a2j/j2a by Fons Adriaensen repackaged as an internal client instead of being an external standalone tool.<br/>
JACK1 already added this a few years ago.<br/>
This zalsa version is slightly more up to date and with a few new fixes on top.

On supported systems, we can use it by running:

```
jack_load zalsa_out -i "-d hw:Mio"
```

This will activate the "Mio" soundcard as an output in the JACK graph.<br/>
You can use `jack_unload zalsa_out` to deactivate it, or alternatively control the start/stop purely in CLI with:

```
jack_load -w -a zalsa_out -i "-d hw:Mio"
```

Which will automatically unload the internal client after Ctrl+C or SIGTERM.

Worth noting that, since internal clients run in the JACK server process,
they will log/print information on that process and not on the `jack_load` one.<br/>
So watch out for that if you need to debug anything.
